# Chapter 1 - setup and basics

The code for this section

- https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/tree/main/lesson01/myproject

## 01 Project Setup

1. create a virtual environment & Activate it \
   `>python -m venv .venv `\
   **Choose just one (bat for cmd or ps1 for power shell)** \
   `>.venv\Scripts\activate.bat `\
   `>.venv\Scripts\activate.ps1 `
2. Install Django \
   pip install django
3. Verify Django Install

```
# from the command line - invoke the python interpreter
> python

# from the python terminal
>>> import django
>>> django.__version__
'5.1.2'
>>> quit()
```

4. create your django project \
   `> django-admin startproject myproj`

- I have used "myproj" as the name feel free to change to your choice
- After running verify that a new folder, myproj, has appeared in your workspace. inside of myproj there should be another folder "myproj", as well as a file: manage.py. The top myproj represents your django project and the inner one represents the main app. It's important to note
  that django uses the idea of an app to modularize your web app. So we may, and we will, create more apps as we build out a full some application.
- manage.py is an interface to the django commands used to build, test, and view the website.
  - for more details: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/django-admin/

5. At this point let's quickly check that everything is running properly \
   `> py manage.py runserver`

- you may get some warning about unapplied migrations, ignore this for now.
- you should also get the following line if everything worked out well
  ```
  Starting development server at http://127.0.0.1:8000/
  Quit the server with CTRL-BREAK.
  ```
- at this point open your browser and go to the url http://127.0.0.1:8000/. You should see the django success page. If for some odd reason you don't get a success message, delete everything, all the folders, and go back to the top of this page.  
  _nb_ you may have noticed a few new files appear in your project - **pycache**: is the compiled code that is being used to run your project - db.sqlite3 : This is your database. Django automatically creates it by default. we will look at it more closely later. If you're interested in exploring it there are some great extensions for VS Code

## 02 - Setting up our URLs

Inside of your myproj app you should see a urls.py file, and inside of that there is a urlpatterns list variable. This file defines how a URL request is routed for handling. By default django comes with an admin app which is built in, and you should see this pattern defined in urls.py. So let's create a couple of new pages and connect them appropriately

1. Inside "myproj > myproj" create a file views.py  
   Inside this file create the following functions

   ```python
   from django.http import HttpResponse

   def homepage(request):
       return HttpResponse('Hello world - Homepage')

   def about(request):
       return HttpResponse('Hello world - about')
   ```

2. Add the following statements to the urls.py file

   ```python
    # ADD import to the views file we create above
    from . import views
    # APPEND inside urlpatterns variable
    path('',views.homepage),
    path('about/',views.about),
   ```

3. try out your pages

- run the server: `py manage.py runserver`
- try the url http://127.0.0.1:8000/
- try the url http://127.0.0.1:8000/about/

Let's take a moment to understand what is happening here

- 1 you use a url to request a page
- 2 the request is recieved by the server and it looks inside url to determine which pattern it matches
- 3 upon determining the pattern the appropriate view will be called, and given the request variable
- 4 the view executes and returns a result
- 5 your browser receives the result and displays it

At this point the result is just a string although this is rarely true in reality. In the next step we will improve upon this by building out some templates. Later on we will also look at the request variable as we progress. It is a built in variable that contains the data in the request.

More information see: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/request-response/

## 03 - Setting up some basic pages

1. Create some new folders

- 1a. create a folder 'myproj/templates' (_nb_ this is in the proj folder not the app folder)
- 1b. create a folder 'myproj/static'

2. Add some new files

- 2a - Inside templates create 2 pages: about.html & home.html

  - copy the contents from here
  - https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/tree/main/lesson01/myproject/templates

- 2b - create a folder 'css' inside static and create a file style.css
  - copy and paste the contents from
  - https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/blob/main/lesson01/myproject/static/css/style.css
- 2c - create a folder 'js' inside static and create a file main.js
  - add the following line to main.js
  - console.log('this is a message from your js file')

3. Modify the file 'myproj/myproj/settings. inside settings.py there will be a list variable called 'TEMPLATES' with an inner dictionary. The 'DIRS' key at this point will still be empty, set it as follows

- 'DIRS': ['templates']
- Next create the following variable and set it accordingly
  - STATICFILES_DIRS = [os.path.join(BASE_DIR,'static')]
  - i would suggest putting this below the pre-existing variable 'STATIC_URL'
- next add 'import os' to the top of the settings file

4. modify the views file 'myproj/myproj/views.py' to look like this

   ```python
   from django.shortcuts import render

   def homepage(request):
       return render(request,'home.html')

   def about(request):
       return render(request,'about.html')
   ```

At this point you should be able to run your server and see the changes. Your about and home page will be styled similarly. Also your about page should output a message to the javascript console.

to see the javascript console (in chrome)

- press F12 and the developers toolbar should open on the right hand side
- select console from the top menu of the developers tools
- select message from the left pane of the developers tools

This ends chapter 1. and we move onto chapter 2
