# Chapter 2 - Apps and Templates

At this point we assume you have a simple yet functional web app, built along the lines of chapter one.

The code for this section

- https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/tree/main/lesson02/myproject

Just a quick reminder:

1. Ensure you are using the same env from the previous chapter, and that it is active. Otherwise you may get bizarre errors such as django not found
2. Ensure you're terminal is inside the project directory.

## 01 - Applications

We begin this chapter by building out a simple application. An application is an abstraction of sorts, it is the encapsulation, or modularization, of functionality. For example a blog could be an application as could a shopping cart. It is generally frowned upon to mix functionality in single application. Reason being is that it can become more difficult to maintain.

We will create a posts app.

1. Call on manage.py to startapp and give it the name posts
   - `> py .\manage.py startapp posts`
   - this creates the scaffolding to support an app. however many of the files will be almost empty
2. place the following code into 'posts > views.py'
   ```python
   def posts_list(request):
       return render(request, 'TODO' )
   ```
   - this is justa stub for now we will come back to it
3. Next we need to register our app with the project
   - goto: myproj > settings and scroll down to INSTALLED_APPS
   - append the following to the list elements
   - `'posts'`
4. Next we create templates specific to the posts app, this is similar to what we did before
   - inside the posts folder create a folder templates, and inside templates create a folder posts
   - inside the folder posts create a file posts_list.html
   - just copy and paste the code from your home page - change the wording so you know the right page is being returned
5. At this point we need to ensure requests are redirected to the posts_list page. Recall that near the start of ch01 we set up the urls.py file to recognize certain patterns and redirect a request accordingly. We will now need to add our posts app to the urlpatterns variable inside our url.py, and we need to add a urls.py file to our posts app. This will allow us to further disect the url in a manner specific to the posts app.

- create a file urls.py inside posts folder
- copy contents from urls.py inside the project folder, and remove the original patterns, or keep one so we can edit as per the below snippet
  - `path('',views.posts_list),`
- note that we do NOT need to type posts in the first arg, that will go into the urls file in the project level. Add the below to the original urls.py file, put it at the bottom to prevent any potential conflict with the previous ones
  - `path('posts/',include('posts.urls')),`
  - This will require an import
  ```python
  from django.urls import include
  ```
- next we can complete our posts_list view function as follows
  - `return render(request, 'posts/posts_list.html' )`

At this point you should give it a test
`> py manage.py runserver`

- you'll notice that / and /about should work and will look the same as before. /posts will also work but it won't look very pretty. This brings us to the next section about templates

## 02 - Templates

Up until now our html pages have been a lot of copy and paste. I'm sure you can imagine how difficult this would be to maintain as a website grows bigger and bigger. The only real difference between our pages should be the content. Other things like the style and the js should be the same across our pages.

In this section we will create a central template that can be used by our other pages to keep things consistent. To do this we will also create a menu bar so we can navigate between our pages

1. First update the style.css file with the contents from

- https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/blob/main/lesson02/myproject/static/css/style.css

2. let's create a layout page

- create the file layout.html inside the project templates folder
- copy the contents from
  - https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/blob/main/lesson02/myproject/templates/layout.html
- Now take a moment to review this file. you'll notice an interesting pattern of brackets and percentage signs. this is code used by the django templating system. Inside the main tags you'll notice
  ```django
  <main>
    {% block content %}
    {% endblock %}
  </main>
  ```
  this is the key to our child pages. each of the pages will use extend the layout and will insert their content into this 'block content' area.

3. Now we need to modify our original pages to use this layout

- 3a - make a copy of your home page, delete the contents, and paste in the new content from
  - https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/blob/main/lesson02/myproject/templates/home.html
- 3b - do the same for about.html, then edit wording
- 3c - do the same for posts_list.html, then edit wording

```django
{% extends 'layout.html' %}        # this tells django to inherit from the layout page
{% block title %}                  # this will overwrite the layout block of the same name
    ...
{% endblock %}
{% block content %}                # this will overwrite the layout block of the same name
    ...
{% endblock %}
```

The end result now is that the layout page defines the structure of all pages. Child pages overwrite the parent in order to deliver custom content, content specific to that page.

Anyhoo, at this point everything should now be up and running. spin up your server and give it a look over.
