# Chapter 4 - Django ORM

At this point we assume you have a simple yet functional web app, built along the previous chapters.

The code for this section

- https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/tree/main/lesson04/myproject

Just a quick reminder:

1. Ensure you are using the same env from the previous chapter, and that it is active. Otherwise you may get bizarre errors such as django not found
2. Ensure you're terminal is inside the project directory.

In chapter 3 we looked at models and migrations. In this chapter we delve deeper into the Django ORM which is the magic behind the models.

For those using VS Code I highly recommend you find an sql lite extension that allows you to look at the data in an sql lite 3 file from inside vs code

## 01 - Django ORM

For the unaware an ORM is an Object Relational Mapper. It is a piece of software that maintains the objects (code) that serves as a reflection of the data. It maps these objects to data tables and recreates the relationships between objects.

In a nutshell: it maintains the code that reflects, or mirrors, the database structure.

In the case of Django ORM this mapping is a two way street. So for example it can create code based on a pre-existing database. or it can create database based on the objects in the code. The latter is what we have done so far. Recall that we created a model class posts in our code and then we told Django to make and apply the migrations. Behind the scenes Django would have created a 'create table ...' scripts as defined by the model class and then executed it against the db.

We will begin by creating some Post data from the command line, This is easier for the moment, than creating a new form in html which we will get to later

```
> py manage.py shell

Python 3.13.0 (tags/v3.13.0:60403a5, Oct  7 2024, 09:38:07) [MSC v.1941 64 bit (AMD64)] on win32
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
(InteractiveConsole)
>>> from posts.models import Post
>>> p = Post()
>>> p.title = "My first post"
>>> p.body = "this is my first post. it was entered from the command line"
>>> p.save()
```

This is now saved. You should now see this in your database.

You can either use your extension to look at it, or better yet we can verify using a query built into the Django ORM

```
>>> Post.objects.all()
<QuerySet [<Post: Post object (1)>]>
```

This is a bit cryptic though. So to improve this we can simply add a **str** or **repr** function to our model class

Add this function to the Post model

```python
def __str__(self) -> str:
    return self.title
```

now go back to the terminal and run the shell just as before

```python
>>> from posts.models import Post
>>> Post.objects.all()
<QuerySet [<Post: My first post>]>
```

Looks a lot nicer eh? Feel free to create another posts, from the command line.

```python
>>> p = Post()
>>> p.title = 'My 2nd post'
>>> p.body = 'This is my second post. the Next post will be the third posts'
>>> p.save()
>>> Post.objects.all()
<QuerySet [<Post: My first post>, <Post: My 2nd post>]>
```
