# Chapter 5 - Django Admin

Source Code

- https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/tree/main/lesson05/myproject

## 01 - Django Admin

You may recall seeing the following line in the project urls.py file

```python
    path('admin/', admin.site.urls),
```

Django comes with built in administration app that is part of the framework and does not appear in your project folder. In this section we look at some of the functionality built in to Django.

- go ahead and start your server
- add '/admin' to the end of your url

Now you should see a login page, but no registration page. This won't be a problem as we can use manage.py to create a superuser.

In your terminal

```
> python manage.py createsuperuser

# It will ask for the following
Username (leave blank to use 'monze'): monz
Email address:
Password:
Password (again):
This password is too short. It must contain at least 8 characters.
Bypass password validation and create user anyway? [y/N]: y
Superuser created successfully.
** monz **
```

Now go ahead and rerun your server, and use your credentials to log in. By default you'll see Groups and Users. If you click on users you will see your user name.

Our next step will be to hook up our posts app to the admin panel

- go to 'myproj > posts > admin.py'
- add the following code
  ```
  from .models import Post
  admin.site.register(Post)
  ```
- rerun the server
- verify that posts now appears in the admin panel
- click on posts and you'll be shown a list of the posts that we created in previous chapters. You should also see an add button. Go ahead and give it a try

Now let's add the post list to our post page.

## 02 - Post Display Page

Our first step is to pull and display the Posts

- Go to 'myproj > posts > views.py'
- Copy paste the code from
  - https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/blob/main/lesson05/myproject/posts/views.py
- note the last arguement in the call to render
  - this is how you pass data from the view to the template
  - the value is the list of posts that were pulled and need to be displayed

Now go to 'myproj > posts > templates > posts > posts_list.html'

- Add the following code into the content block

```django
<section>
    <h1>Posts</h1>
    {% for post in posts %}
        <article class="post">
            <h2>{{ post.title }}</h2>
            <p>{{ post.date }}</p>
            <p>{{ post.body }}</p>
        </article>
    {% endfor %}
</section>
```

- What's happening here is that the for loop will act upon the posts variable that was passed
- now go check it out, not pretty but it's up and running

feel free to style it as you see fit
