# Chapter 6 - Pages, URLs, Slugs

Source Code

- https://github.com/gitdagray/django-course/tree/main/lesson06/myproject

## 01 - Pages

Recall that when we created the posts urls.py file it was pretty basic. It only contained one line

```django
path('',views.posts_list),
```

lets add a name

```django
path('',views.posts_list, name='posts'),
```

What this does is give a name to this url path. so now we can parametrize the URL link in the layout page. Now the url path is no longer hardcoded. Any edits to the urls.py would be reflected here as well.

```html
<a href="/posts">📰 Posts</a>
<!--  old way  -->
<a href="{% url 'posts' %}">📰 Posts</a>
<!--  new way  -->
```

for our next step we want to display a post. To do so we must first set up the path so that our url.py knows how to direct the request. We are going to use one of Django's path converters (you can read more about them here: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/topics/http/urls/). What this does is recognize and match. The left side of the colon is the path converter, and the right side is the variable it will be placed into. Go head and add this to the app urls.py file. (Note that the name has changed, as well as the view)

```django
path('<slug:slug>',views.post_page, name='post'),
```

- now add a post_page view. we will just pass back a string for now to check that everything is up and running before we more onto the template.

```python
from django.http import HttpResponse
def post_page(request, slug):
    return HttpResponse(slug)
```

Next we will edit the post page, the post title should serve as a link to the post page

```html
<!-- Original -->
<h2>{{ post.title }}</h2>
<!-- new version -->
<h2><a href={" url 'page' slug=post.slug "}> {{ post.title }}</h2>
```

at this point give it a test. the post title should be a link  
Notice what happens to your url when you click on the title.

## 02 - Editing

You may have noticed that we used 'page' wording in several location. This is less than ideal because it is rather generic. so we want to make a few edits so that django understands when a page refers to a post or a page refers to some other app.

We begin by adding app_name variable just above the urlpatterns variable

```python
app_name = 'posts'
```

Next we edit the url in the layout page

```
<a href="{% url 'posts:list' %}">📰 Posts</a>
```

This tells django that to pull named url 'list' name from the posts namespace, aka the app.

Our next step is to improve the post_page view we created above. Instead of returning a string we would want it to render a page that we will template.

- first edit the post_page in views to render a new template: post_page.html
- next create a post_page.html template
- configure as you see fit (you could just copy the post_list template and edit it)

And that should be all. your post page should be up, and linked from the post title page
